
COPYRIGHT

This software was written by Grzegorz Kondrak.

Copyright 2000 by Grzegorz Kondrak. All rights reserved.


DESCRIPTION

ALINE is the implementation of the algorithm for aligning phonetic
sequences, which is described in [1] and [2]. The program is written
in C++ and runs under Solaris. It takes from the standard input a list
of word pairs and produces a list of alignments on the standard
output. Assuming that the input data is in the file 'test_set', the
simplest way to use the program is the following:

	aline < test_set > results

For the required input format, consult the sample test file. The
first line contains uppercase 'D', which stands for 'Dynamic
programming' (the only option available right now). The second line
specifies the number of pairs to be compared. The following lines
contain the pairs of words in a special notation (see below),
separated by tabs. Empty lines and lines starting with '#' are
ignored.

The output contains the alignments together with the overall
similarity scores. Since local alignment is used, the aligned
subsequences are delimited by the '|' signs. The '<' sign signifies
that the previous phonetic segment has been aligned with two segments
in the other sequence, a case of compression/expansion. The '-' sign
denotes a "skip", a case of insertion/deletion.

At the start of the output file, the current parameter settings are
listed. The default values are the same as given in [2]. These
settings can be changed by specifying the values on the command line.
The order of the parameters is the following: epsilon, C_sub, C_exp,
C_skip, C_vwl (see [2] for description). The following example changes
the parameter values to 0.05, 25, 0, -5, and 5, respectively:

	aline 0.05 25 0 -5 5 < test_set > results

The notation for entering phonetic sequences is discussed in Section
6.2. of [1]. It's goal is to make it possible to enter IPA symbols
using the ASCII character set. In the scheme, every phonetic symbol is
represented by a single lowercase letter followed by zero or more
uppercase letters. The initial lowercase letter is the base letter
most similar to the sound represented by the phonetic symbol. The
remaining uppercase letters stand for the features in which the
represented sound differs from the sound defined by the base letter.
The following features are available at present:

D - dental
P - palatal
V - palato-alveolar
A - aspirated
C - central
F - front
H - long
N - nasal
S - fricative (spirant)

For examples how various sounds can be expressed using this notation
see the sample input file, which contains the test set from [3].


REFERENCES

[1] G. Kondrak. Alignment of Phonetic Sequences. Technical Report CSRG-402,
    Computer Systems Research Group, University of Toronto, December 1999.

[2] G. Kondrak. A New Algorithm for the Alignment of Phonetic Sequences.
    Proceedings of NAACL'2000.

[3] M. A. Covington. An algorithm to align words for historical comparison.
    Computational Linguistics, 22(4), 1996.

